docs/library/machine.PWM.rst, before:

.. currentmodule:: machine
.. _machine.PWM:

class PWM -- pulse width modulation
===================================

This class provides pulse width modulation output.

Example usage::

    from machine import PWM

    pwm = PWM(pin)          # create a PWM object on a pin
    pwm.duty_u16(32768)     # set duty to 50%

    # reinitialise with a period of 200us, duty of 5us
    pwm.init(freq=5000, duty_ns=5000)

    pwm.duty_ns(3000)       # set pulse width to 3us

    pwm.deinit()

Constructors
------------

.. class:: PWM(dest, *, freq, duty_u16, duty_ns)

   Construct and return a new PWM object using the following parameters:

      - *dest* is the entity on which the PWM is output, which is usually a
        :ref:`machine.Pin <machine.Pin>` object, but a port may allow other values,
        like integers.
      - *freq* should be an integer which sets the frequency in Hz for the
        PWM cycle.
      - *duty_u16* sets the duty cycle as a ratio ``duty_u16 / 65535``.
      - *duty_ns* sets the pulse width in nanoseconds.

   Setting *freq* may affect other PWM objects if the objects share the same
   underlying PWM generator (this is hardware specific).
   Only one of *duty_u16* and *duty_ns* should be specified at a time.

Methods
-------

.. method:: PWM.init(*, freq, duty_u16, duty_ns)

   Modify settings for the PWM object.  See the above constructor for details
   about the parameters.

.. method:: PWM.deinit()

   Disable the PWM output.

.. method:: PWM.freq([value])

   Get or set the current frequency of the PWM output.

   With no arguments the frequency in Hz is returned.

   With a single *value* argument the frequency is set to that value in Hz.  The
   method may raise a ``ValueError`` if the frequency is outside the valid range.

.. method:: PWM.duty_u16([value])

   Get or set the current duty cycle of the PWM output, as an unsigned 16-bit
   value in the range 0 to 65535 inclusive.

   With no arguments the duty cycle is returned.

   With a single *value* argument the duty cycle is set to that value, measured
   as the ratio ``value / 65535``.

.. method:: PWM.duty_ns([value])

   Get or set the current pulse width of the PWM output, as a value in nanoseconds.

   With no arguments the pulse width in nanoseconds is returned.

   With a single *value* argument the pulse width is set to that value.

Specific PWM class implementations
----------------------------------

The following concrete class(es) implement enhancements to the PWM class.

   | :ref:`pyb.Timer for PyBoard <pyb.Timer>`  

Limitations of PWM
------------------

* Not all frequencies can be generated with absolute accuracy due to
  the discrete nature of the computing hardware.  Typically the PWM frequency
  is obtained by dividing some integer base frequency by an integer divider.
  For example, if the base frequency is 80MHz and the required PWM frequency is
  300kHz the divider must be a non-integer number 80000000 / 300000 = 266.67.
  After rounding the divider is set to 267 and the PWM frequency will be
  80000000 / 267 = 299625.5 Hz, not 300kHz.  If the divider is set to 266 then
  the PWM frequency will be 80000000 / 266 = 300751.9 Hz, but again not 300kHz.

  Some ports like the RP2040 one use a fractional divider, which allow a finer
  granularity of the frequency at higher frequencies by switching the PWM
  pulse duration between two adjacent values, such that the resulting average
  frequency is more close to the intended one, at the cost of spectral purity. 

* The duty cycle has the same discrete nature and its absolute accuracy is not
  achievable.  On most hardware platforms the duty will be applied at the next
  frequency period.  Therefore, you should wait more than "1/frequency" before
  measuring the duty.

* The frequency and the duty cycle resolution are usually interdependent.
  The higher the PWM frequency the lower the duty resolution which is available,
  and vice versa. For example, a 300kHz PWM frequency can have a duty cycle
  resolution of 8 bit, not 16-bit as may be expected.  In this case, the lowest
  8 bits of *duty_u16* are insignificant. So::

    pwm=PWM(Pin(13), freq=300_000, duty_u16=2**16//2)

  and::

    pwm=PWM(Pin(13), freq=300_000, duty_u16=2**16//2 + 255)

  will generate PWM with the same 50% duty cycle.

Commit message:

ports/PWM: Change the PWM examples in the documentation.
Adding the freq and duty_u16 keyword settings to the constructor and
sometimes other details in the PWM section.

For SAMD more changes were made to keep up with the changed Pin naming
scheme, for mimxrt a clarification regarding the PWM invert argument was
added, and for rp2 a few words was spent on PWM output pairs of a
channel (aka slice).

Fix minor errors where seen.

docs/library/machine.PWM.rst, after:

.. currentmodule:: machine
.. _machine.PWM:

class PWM -- pulse width modulation
===================================

This class provides pulse width modulation output.

Example usage::

    from machine import PWM

    pwm = PWM(pin, freq=50, duty_u16=8192)  # create a PWM object on a pin
                                            # and set freq and duty
    pwm.duty_u16(32768)     # set duty to 50%

    # reinitialise with a period of 200us, duty of 5us
    pwm.init(freq=5000, duty_ns=5000)

    pwm.duty_ns(3000)       # set pulse width to 3us

    pwm.deinit()

Constructors
------------

.. class:: PWM(dest, *, freq, duty_u16, duty_ns)

   Construct and return a new PWM object using the following parameters:

      - *dest* is the entity on which the PWM is output, which is usually a
        :ref:`machine.Pin <machine.Pin>` object, but a port may allow other values,
        like integers.
      - *freq* should be an integer which sets the frequency in Hz for the
        PWM cycle.
      - *duty_u16* sets the duty cycle as a ratio ``duty_u16 / 65535``.
      - *duty_ns* sets the pulse width in nanoseconds.

   Setting *freq* may affect other PWM objects if the objects share the same
   underlying PWM generator (this is hardware specific).
   Only one of *duty_u16* and *duty_ns* should be specified at a time.

Methods
-------

.. method:: PWM.init(*, freq, duty_u16, duty_ns)

   Modify settings for the PWM object.  See the above constructor for details
   about the parameters.

.. method:: PWM.deinit()

   Disable the PWM output.

.. method:: PWM.freq([value])

   Get or set the current frequency of the PWM output.

   With no arguments the frequency in Hz is returned.

   With a single *value* argument the frequency is set to that value in Hz.  The
   method may raise a ``ValueError`` if the frequency is outside the valid range.

.. method:: PWM.duty_u16([value])

   Get or set the current duty cycle of the PWM output, as an unsigned 16-bit
   value in the range 0 to 65535 inclusive.

   With no arguments the duty cycle is returned.

   With a single *value* argument the duty cycle is set to that value, measured
   as the ratio ``value / 65535``.

.. method:: PWM.duty_ns([value])

   Get or set the current pulse width of the PWM output, as a value in nanoseconds.

   With no arguments the pulse width in nanoseconds is returned.

   With a single *value* argument the pulse width is set to that value.

Specific PWM class implementations
----------------------------------

The following concrete class(es) implement enhancements to the PWM class.

   | :ref:`pyb.Timer for PyBoard <pyb.Timer>`  

Limitations of PWM
------------------

* Not all frequencies can be generated with absolute accuracy due to
  the discrete nature of the computing hardware.  Typically the PWM frequency
  is obtained by dividing some integer base frequency by an integer divider.
  For example, if the base frequency is 80MHz and the required PWM frequency is
  300kHz the divider must be a non-integer number 80000000 / 300000 = 266.67.
  After rounding the divider is set to 267 and the PWM frequency will be
  80000000 / 267 = 299625.5 Hz, not 300kHz.  If the divider is set to 266 then
  the PWM frequency will be 80000000 / 266 = 300751.9 Hz, but again not 300kHz.

  Some ports like the RP2040 one use a fractional divider, which allow a finer
  granularity of the frequency at higher frequencies by switching the PWM
  pulse duration between two adjacent values, such that the resulting average
  frequency is more close to the intended one, at the cost of spectral purity. 

* The duty cycle has the same discrete nature and its absolute accuracy is not
  achievable.  On most hardware platforms the duty will be applied at the next
  frequency period.  Therefore, you should wait more than "1/frequency" before
  measuring the duty.

* The frequency and the duty cycle resolution are usually interdependent.
  The higher the PWM frequency the lower the duty resolution which is available,
  and vice versa. For example, a 300kHz PWM frequency can have a duty cycle
  resolution of 8 bit, not 16-bit as may be expected.  In this case, the lowest
  8 bits of *duty_u16* are insignificant. So::

    pwm=PWM(Pin(13), freq=300_000, duty_u16=2**16//2)

  and::

    pwm=PWM(Pin(13), freq=300_000, duty_u16=2**16//2 + 255)

  will generate PWM with the same 50% duty cycle.
